THE CONDUCT OF LIFE

IN WESTERN AND EASTERN PHILOSOPHY

SPRING 2019

ETHICAL REASONING - 20

LAW -- 2392

HDS - 2313

WEDNESDAYS 1 TO 3

Michael Puett

2 Divinity 226A

Telephone: 617-495-8360

Email: <puett@fas.harvard.edu>

Roberto Mangabeira Unger

Areeda 226

Telephone: 617-495-3156

E-mail: <unger@law.harvard.edu>

Faculty Assistant: Brenda Bee, 617-496-1764

<bbee@law.harvard.edu>

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

A study of approaches in the philosophical traditions of the West and
the East to the conduct of life. Philosophical ethics has often been
understood as meta-ethics: the development of a method of moral inquiry
or justification. Here we focus instead on what philosophy has to tell
us about the first-order question: How should we live our lives?

This year a major concern will be the study and contrast of two such
orientations to existence. One is the philosophical tradition focused on
ideas of self-reliance, self-construction, and
[nonconformity](https://www.google.com/search?rlz=1C5CHFA_enUS814US814&q=nonconformity&spell=1&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjKieLYvfLeAhVBMt8KHSjEBOwQkeECCCkoAA)
(exemplified by Emerson and Nietzsche). The other is a way of thinking
(notably represented by Confucius) that puts its hope in a dynamic of
mutual responsibility, shaped by role and ritual and informed by
imaginative empathy.

No prerequisites other than a willingness to consider a wide range of
problems and materials.

Extended take-home examination.

**CLASS SEQUENCE AND READING ASSIGNMENTS**

**INTRODUCTION: FROM META-ETHICS TO ETHICS**

**January 30**: Introduction: themes and agenda of the course

**February 6:** Meta-ethics: Kantian, consequentialist, and
social-contract theories

Derek Parfit, Summary of Meta-Ethical Theories from *On What Matters,*
vol. I, pp. 14-28 (course website)

**THE PROJECT OF SELF-CONSTRUCTION IN THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE WEST AND ITS
ENGAGEMENT WITH CHRISTIANITY**

**February 13**: The project of self-construction: non-conformity and
greatness

Emerson, \"Self-Reliance\" from *Self-Reliance and Other Essays*

Nietzsche, \"First essay: \'Good\' and \'Evil\', \'Good\' and \'Bad\'
from *On the Genealogy of Morals*

**February 20:** The project of self-construction: self and society from
Romantic struggle to post-Romantic disillusionment

Hegel, \"The Romantic Art Form\" from *On the Arts,* pp. 23-67 plot
summaries and analysis of two French novels of the 19th century:
Stendhal, *The Charterhouse of Parma,* and Flaubert, *Sentimental
Education* (course website)

RMU, on Christianity, Romanticism, Modernism from *Passion: An Essay on
Personality,* pp. 22-39 (course website)

**February 27:** The project of self-construction and the paradise of
desire

Barthes, from *Fourier, Sade, Loyola* (course website)

Freud, *Civilization and Its Discontents,* sections I, II, III (course
website)

RMU, on insatiability from *The Religion of the Future,* pp. 17-23

**March 6:** The project of self-construction in the light of Christian
hope

Hegel, \"The Moral Teaching of Jesus: (pp. 224-253) and \"Love\" (pp.
302-308) from *Early Theological Writings* (course website)

Karl Barth, from *Epistle to the Romans,* pp. 48-54 (course website)

Karl Rahner, from \"On the Theology of Hope\" and \"The Christian Future
of Man\" (course website)

RMU, the doctrine of the virtues reconsidered from *The Religion of the
Future,* pp. 366-387

**March 13:** The future of the project of self-construction:
contrasting visions

Simon May, \"The New Ideal: \'To become what one is\' \"from
*Nietzsche\'s Ethics and his War on Morality*, pp. 104-134 (course
website)

RMU, \"The Conduct of Life\" from *The Religion of the Future,* pp.
341-366, 387-444

**March 20**: Spring recess

**BEYOND THE PROJECT OF SELF-CONSTRUCTION**

**March 27:** Mutual responsibility and imaginative empathy in the
teaching of Confucius: ritual, role, the meritocratic division of labor,
solidarity, and the imagination of the other

Confucius, *Analects*

Mencius (excerpts, course website)

**April 3:** Overcoming the world and the will: world rejection and
universal compassion in the teaching of the Buddha

*Sources of Indian Tradition,* vol. I, pp. 29-40, 93-124, 153-187
(course website)

**April 10:** Overcoming the world and the will: Schopenhauer\'s
proposal for salvation

Schopenhauer, *The World as Will and Representation,* vol. I, prefaces
to the first and second editions, and sections 53, 57, 58, 59, 68, 69
(vol I to be acquired)

from vol.II, section XLIX, \"The Road to Salvation,\" (course website)

**CONCLUSION: MORAL INSIGHT AND ITS LIMITS**

**April 17:** The political contexts and consequences of approaches to
the conduct of life

**April 24:** Commitment and nihilism

**ASSIGNED BOOKS**

Many of the readings are drawn from six assigned books. All these books
are paperbacks, available at the Harvard Coop and on Amazon. The
remaining assigned readings will be posted on the course website.

> Ralph Waldo Emerson, *Self-Reliance and Other Essays,* Dover
>
> Friedrich Nietzsche, *On the Genealogy of Morals*, Penguin
>
> Arthur Schopenahuer, *The World as Will and Representation, *
>
> *Volume I,* Dover
>
> Confucius, *Analects,* Penguin
>
> Roberto Mangabeira Unger, *The Religion of the Future,* Verso
>
> Note that in the class sequence below and in the readings assigned for
> each class there is no reference to *The Religion of the Future.* You
> should have read the following parts of this book, as background to
> the arguments of the course, by the class of **March 13**: chapters 1,
> 2, 3, 4, and 7. In addition, read the concluding section of Chapter 5,
> pp. 257-289.

**WRITING REQUIREMENTS**

During the semester undergraduates will write two brief papers. The
first paper will be due in class on **March 13**. The second paper will
be due electronically by **April 10**, 12 noon.

Each of these papers, on topics to be set, will respond to a major
problem or idea discussed in the course up to that time. Each will be
between 6 and 10 double-spaced pages long. Each will count for 20% of
the final grade.

In lieu of a final examination, all students will write an extended
take-home examination. This final paper or examination will provide them
with an occasion to respond to a central aspect of the argument of the
course. It should have a minimum of 15 and a maximum of 20 double-spaced
pages. The topic or topics will be described in class on **April 10**.
The final examination paper will be due by 4 p.m. on **May 2** (no
extensions). It will count for 50% of the final grade for
undergraduates. 10% of the final grade for undergraduates will be
attributed to participation in section.

The grade for all graduate students, including law students, will be
based entirely on their final take-home examination, which will be for
them the only writing requirement in the course.
